Techniques for producing realistic mountain ranges on procedurally generated planets lag behind those for generating coastlines. A common procedure is to increase terrain height towards the centre of a landmass. This approach works well for volcanic islands, but doesn't scale well enough to be suitable for a continent. Another technique is to generate mountain ranges along random lines after the coastline has been created, but this produces unconvincing results.
The Continent Construction Kit (CCK) uses a set of nodes, and the links between them, to specify the topology of a continent (or set of continents) on a sphere, without requiring a precise definition of the terrain itself. The coastline is generated using random noise as usual, but is coerced by the nodes and links into appearing in the general shape of the specified continent. Mountains (and valleys) are specified in the links, with a minimum height, maximum height, thickness and altitude of plateau. To produce a simple mountain range, two nodes are created, then these attributes set when they are linked.
For example, Andes-esque coastal mountain ranges can be produced by linking sea nodes with land nodes and specifying the presence of mountains between them. In the example output below, the Himalayas are specified as a single node with a high altitude, connected to their surrounding regions with no mountains in between. Islands can be produced by adding nodes that remain unlinked when the globe is sampled. In the example, Britain and Japan are unlinked.
The first image below shows an equirectangular projection height map produced by sampling a globe featuring a continent with Eurasian topology. The second image shows the regions defined by each node; this feature is very useful for preserving the environmental or cultural data that led to the definition of a node in the first place. For example, two nodes might represent areas of desert and grassland, even though there are no interesting geographic features between them. Note however that the CCK does not produce the environments themselves; it only specifies where they should be.